And I think this was an awakening of
what the Buddhists would call bodhicitta,
the desire to save all sentient beings.
And the way I came to understand it later,
I didn't understand it at the time,
it was basically reminding me of a
commitment that I had made before I was
born, what my incarnation was about, and
and it was basically awakening my
compassion. Keep watching to learn more.
For early access to our videos and live stream
events, sign up for our free weekly newsletter
at newthinkingallowed.org. New Thinking Allowed
is presented by the California Institute for
Human Science, a fully accredited university
offering distant learning graduate degrees
that focus on mind, body, and spirit. The topics
that we cover here, we are particularly excited
to announce new degrees emphasizing parapsychology
and the paranormal. Visit
their website at cihs.edu.
Book 4 in the new Thinking Allowed
dialogue series is Charles T. Tart,
70 Years of Exploring Consciousness and
Parapsychology, now available on Amazon.
Thinking Allowed
Conversations on the
Leading Edge of Knowledge and Discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey Mishlove.
Hello and welcome. I'm Jeffrey Mishlove. Today is
a special day. I'm here in Albuquerque with a live
guest in my little studio. I'm with Chris Bache.
He has been interviewed several times on New
Thinking Allowed previously. Chris is an emeritus
professor from Akron State University in Ohio.
He is the author of several books including Life
Cycles, a book about reincarnation, Dark Night,
Early Dawn, The Living Classroom, and LSD
and the Mind of the Universe. Welcome, Chris.
Thank you, Jeff. It's a
pleasure to be here with you.
It's a real pleasure to be here with you in
person, in the flesh, after having watched so many
videos with you and having been on the live
stream with you as well. I thought today would
be an opportunity for our viewers, many
of whom will have watched these interviews
because they were quite popular, to get to
know you personally. I know, for example,
you've talked about your life a little bit.
At one time you were considering joining the
Catholic priesthood. Yeah, I was in the seminary
for four years, three years in high school and
one year in college. That's a very serious
commitment to enter the seminary while you're
still in high school. So you had a Catholic
upbringing, obviously. A very kind of ecumenically
broad but strong Catholic upbringing down
in the deep south in Vicksburg, Mississippi.
My family comes from Louisiana on both sides, so
that French Catholic heritage down in New Orleans
area. So we were Catholic. I'll tell you, I don't
remember a time in my life when I didn't want to
be a priest. I mean, when I kind of became aware,
became conscious, and certainly by the time I'm
five years old, I remember having memories of
wanting to be a priest. It wasn't encouraged
by my family. It wasn't part of that. It just was
there in the beginning. So I went into seminary
as soon as I could in high school. They don't
have high school seminaries anymore because
they weren't really effective in yielding priests.
But I did. I went in the seminary and stayed in
until my freshman year in college and then
basically decided that celibacy and I weren't
cut out for each other and left. It's not as if
you left Catholicism at that point. No, I was at
Notre Dame and I got my degree in theology at
the University of Notre Dame. But by the time I
finished my undergraduate work, I was no longer
a Catholic in any normative sense. I went to
Cambridge and I studied New
Testament criticism. The search
for the historical Jesus was my earliest
academic love. By the time I left Cambridge,
I really was no longer a Christian. The historical
Jesus actually was my way out of Christianity
and into a larger world of spiritual teachers.
I see. What happened exactly? Well, I learned
Greek and Hebrew and all the languages one needs
to become a young scholar of New Testament. The
search for the historical Jesus after several
years at undergraduate and then these two years at
Cambridge, I think I got a pretty good grounding
of where research was taking us, where we were
going to be going in future years in that area.
I felt I had a good strong grounding in the best
historian's assessment of who this man was
and what was made of him. The theological
interpretations that followed really couldn't
capture, I think, or adequately convey the depth
and power of this person. I encountered in him
an intensity of spiritual awareness that was
larger than the Christology
that I had internalized
and then when I began to study world religions
more broadly, I began to realize that there were
other beings who had this same deep quality
of spiritual connection. I never left
Christianity. I just opened up into a
larger family of religious discourse.
I taught world religions for decades. On the
arm of Houston Smith, his books were the ones
that I used in my courses. So I would travel
the world every semester learning from the great
spiritual traditions of the world. Well, Houston
Smith was a good friend of mine. I did at least
half a dozen or more interviews with him. I got
to know him well in the days when I started doing
interviews in the San Francisco Bay area. To me,
he was a guiding light and a saint. He really was.
Probably next to Stan Grof, the single individuals
had the largest impact on my mind because I
taught out of his books in world religions for so
many years. Wonderful man. Stan Grof was also a
big influence on you. Huge. When I finished my
graduate work in Brown in philosophy of religion
and I was looking for where to take my work
next, I encountered the work of two people
who had a huge impact on me. One was Ian
Stevenson at the University of Virginia,
his work in reincarnation. And he convinced me in
one reading of his book, 20 Cases Suggestive of
Reincarnation, that reincarnation is simply true.
It's just a fact. And that meant erasing seven
years of undergraduate and graduate school because
no other in my studies had reincarnation been
taken seriously, neither in the western religions
nor in the scientific traditions which had erased
the western traditions in some ways
in my thinking. And so I had to
start all over again and figure
out if reincarnation is true,
what does that tell us about
the world we're living in? Well,
what does it mean by true? Yeah, I think it's just
a fact of nature. It's just an aspect of life.
There's so much we don't understand about
it. We don't understand the details of how
we don't understand anything about the
physics of the soul. But the phenomenology,
the phenomenological evidence shows us that our
mind predates our body and that our current life
is part of a tapestry of a much larger causal web
of lives stretching through time. And I began to
understand that if you don't understand
reincarnation, then you can't understand much
that's happening in this world. It's like trying
to take one chapter out of a Sherlock Holmes novel
and trying to understand the entire book and all
you have is that one chapter. We need the other
chapters to really understand the things that led
into this life and what we're studying in this
starting in this life continuing on in other
lifetimes. Do you seem to feel that everybody
has a chain of historical
incarnations that they've
experienced? Well, in general, I think so. But
of course, there have to be beginners somewhere.
There have to be people in their first lifetime
or second or third lifetime. And then it's like
at a university. There are freshmen
and there are seniors and there
are people who have been at this
game for a longer period of time.
And the spiritual traditions often refer to those
as old souls. That's a metaphor for someone who's
gathered sufficient experience that they've
spiritually matured over the course of their
lifetimes. I would imagine as a student of
theology there would be in the literature
many other options besides reincarnation. Yeah,
they are. But this to me is not a theological
proposition. I mean, for a long time it was
discussed in theological or philosophical
terms and debated. But I think in the last 50
years it's moved from the theologian's table
to the psychologist's table. It's become a matter
of empirical research. And the empirical research
I think is overwhelming. So the first book
I wrote was my response to Ian Stevenson.
And there I just basically my conviction is we
have overwhelming empirical evidence. Stevenson's
research and the research on
coming out of past life therapy,
Roger Woolger, for example, and other
past life therapists. Cumulatively there
is sufficient evidence to make this the most
reasonable hypothesis for understanding life. And
that conviction is only deepened in my psychedelic
work and in my other studies through the years.
And that brings me to the second person that I
encountered both in my first year when I was just
beginning my academic career was Stan Grof. His
book, Realms of the Human Unconscious, which had
just been published then, was a turning point for
me. When I read it I immediately recognized that
Stan's work was incredibly important not just for
psychology and therapy, but for philosophy, my
discipline. And I knew I needed, I wanted to get
involved in this. I felt a calling. And I knew
that, I felt that the people who would be doing
the most important work in my field of
philosophy of religion would be
speaking out of an experiential
basis, not simply a theoretical basis. And I knew
it would take time, it would take a long time
to really do serious work in the area. So I
settled in in 1979 and it began as a course of
LSD therapy following Stan's protocols. And that
ended up lasting much longer than I had expected.
It ended up lasting 20 years of active work. In
fact, I'd have to say I think of you as one of
the foremost psychonauts, if I can use that term,
of whom I'm aware you took it very methodically,
very seriously over years, keeping careful records
of your experiences and with a clear idea of the
goal. Well you know, yeah,
and many misunderstandings and
misinterpretations. I mean I had a limited
understanding of the psyche and a limited
understanding of how this work would proceed
and those had to fall away over time. But in the
beginning, well let me back up, I had been
practicing meditation for years since
undergraduate work and in through
graduate school. Had started
with transcendental meditation and then moved into
Vipassana meditation and had experienced the usual
blocks that people have in the first years of
their meditation practice. And when I met Stan's
work I thought, oh here's a way in which I can
push through these blocks faster, I could burn up
my karma faster, and I would get on the other
side and I would become enlightened faster. Well
that's not the way it kind of worked out because
I came to understand that the fundamental model
we were using in the transpersonal community
was still a model of personal transformation,
that you did your work, you encountered, you sort
of cleansed your own karma, you dealt with your
past lives, you cleared up your inner baggage,
and then you would move into some heightened
state of spiritual sensitivity. Like you're
finished. Yeah, we'll come
enlightened, and that was
you know, but what happened was not that. And I
think it was partly because of the very aggressive
protocol I adopted. Now Stan outlines
two protocols, psycholytic therapy,
low dose, where you peel the
psyche layer by layer, piece
by piece, and high dose psychedelic
therapy, where in the Spring Grove
program in Maryland they were using high dose
therapy for to address anxiety, death anxiety,
among people who were terminally ill. It was
limited to three sessions. So coming along later
I thought, well if you could do it safely three
times, you could do it safely more times. And
because I was married at the time, and soon there
would be children coming along, and it was hard to
get time away from dual career
family for a weekend of this
type of deep inner work, I decided to do
psychedelic therapy, working with high doses,
thinking I would, if I could maintain the
stability needed to work creatively and
productively at these high states,
I would basically chew up my
karma faster. I would clean my plate faster. But
what happened, of course, is if you work with
highly amplified states of consciousness, pretty
soon you just shatter the boundaries of your
personal psyche, so the working dynamic becomes
larger than anything which could be explained
in terms of your personal psyche, even your
personal enlightenment. Within a couple of years
I was being drawn into vast experiential
territories that really didn't have too much
to do with me personally, and over time
I came to understand that I was engaging
what you might think of as co-ec systems or
systems of condensed experiences within the
collective psyche, what I called metacoec
systems, that there was some way in which
my individual work had been changed into
serving not my personal clarification,
but somehow contributing a small piece to the
clarification of the human psyche as a whole,
to the collective unconscious. Are you suggesting
then that you had personal issues that did not
get addressed? Oh no, they got addressed both
before and after that work. So it wasn't a
spiritual bypass. No, if you keep coming
back over and over again sooner or later,
the universe is going to clean you up. It may
clean you up in the beginning using one protocol,
it'll clean you up later using another protocol,
but if you keep engaging the deep energy of life,
it's going to bring out all your shadow
material, all your former life material,
it's going to release you
from the pains that bind you.
So that happened and then you entered into this
state, I guess one way to put it, and if I recall
you used the phrase the consciousness of
humanity. Yes. What I found was that when the
bubble of your personal psyche pops, you know,
and that egoic bubble pops and is no longer the
organizing matrix for your experience, you don't
simply pop into unitive non-dual consciousness.
There are many layers of consciousness between
your individual ego and unitive consciousness,
so the consciousness of God or something like
this. There is all these layers of the collective
unconsciousness, the mind of the species, the
psyche of the species, and early on in my work,
when I was transitioning after I'd gone through
what Stan would have described as a classic
perinatal death-rebirth process where
my individual psyche was just shattered,
then I went through an experience where I was
confronting the killing of thousands and thousands
of children, just being mauled and maimed by
soldiers, and I was powerless to be able to
stop it. And I think this was an awakening
of what the Buddhists would call bodhicitta,
the desire to save all sentient beings.
And the way I came to understand it later,
I didn't understand it at the time, it was
basically reminding me of a commitment that
I had made before I was born, what my incarnation
was about. And it was basically awakening my
compassion so that I would do anything, if
given the opportunity, to save the children,
to save the lives of the children. And then
began a two-year process of entering into this
ocean of suffering in the cleansing portion of
the sessions. Of course, there is the ecstatic
portion and the cleansing portion, but in the
cleansing portion there's this huge deeper and
deeper and deeper experience of the terrible
suffering that still resides within the collective
psyche. All the things that we've done to each
other, all the wars and the killing and the being
killed and all the rapes and all the droughts and
all the suffering of humanity, anything which is
unresolved in any individual's life by the time
they die, accumulates in the psyche. And just as
our individual trauma compromises our individual
clarity, our collective trauma compromises our
collective clarity. And for some reason, a large
portion of my work for those years involved
draining some of that toxicity out of the
collective psyche. And I don't think there's
anything unique to me and certainly nothing
unique to psychedelics about that work. I think
there are many, many beings at all sorts of
levels who are working primarily in service
of healing the collective psyche to make humanity
more able to take advantage of the shifts of
energy that are coming to us in history. Because
I would think if you're in touch with the psyche
of humanity in addition to the enormity of the
pain and the suffering, the needless pain and
suffering, the cruel heartless pain and suffering,
there are also many things to feel differently
about the ambitions of people, the visions
that people have, the joy that people have, the
creativity that has been expressed in art and
music and literature. Yeah, and the genius.
What happened for me is that in the first
year of experiencing the ocean of suffering,
when I would go through the crisis and go through
a breaking point and surrender to that, then I was
taken for the first time into what I came to call
deep time. And I was taken for a year and seven
sessions. I experienced my entire life from
beginning to end as a single totality. And I
was given an set of insights into what my life
was about, into personal relationships that I was
involved in, about my work at the university.
But it was very kind of personal. It was at the
psychic level of transpersonal experience. And
then I stopped my work for six years for reasons
I described in the book. And when I resumed a
year, six years later, the ocean of suffering
began exactly where it had stopped, and it kept
getting deeper and deeper, worse and worse.
But what was happening in the ecstatic portion of
those sessions is that I entered what I call the
initiation into the universe.
I was being initiated,
I was like I was given a crash course in Cosmology
101, being given a series of experiences that far
transcended my individual life and opened me to
some of the fundamental metaphysical truths
of existence. In that process, as that process
continued to deepen, I kept being immersed in the
collective psyche of humanity. And I was being
basically taught, I've always had a sense of being
guided in my sessions by a higher intelligence
a higher consciousness that never manifested
in any figure or form. It never adopted a form,
it was always invisible, but it was always there,
always guiding me and instructing me. And so I
dissolved in the collective psyche repeatedly and
was taught the ways in which our individual minds
are part of our species mind. Even our individual
diseases are part of the collective diseases that
we are processing in history. And that everything
we do individually, both the acquisition of our
problems and the solution of those problems, come
from and radiate back into the collective psyche.
And even our diseases come out of our humanity's
stage of our evolutionary history. And as we
heal those diseases, that healing goes
out and ripples out into the collective.
And that's the primary thing I was addressing
in Dark Night Early Dawn. I was beginning to
understand that there is no such thing as private
karma. It's all collective karma in the end,
just as there's no separate private identity, but
always an interconnected web work of identity.
There is no such thing as private karma. We're
always drawing from and feeding back into the
karma of our species. We're all growing together.
We're all arm and arm. We're all developing it
together. And this was sort of
laid out for me over and over,
clarity and clear and clear instructions.
And it's very interesting. I mean,
it would take me through a series
of instructions and then double
back and take me through it again and again until
it was sure that I understood. And then we would
go on to the next lesson. As if
you were following a curriculum.
It was. And it was not a curriculum
of my own making. It didn't come
out of my studies. It didn't come
out of my reading. It was the only
teacher I've ever had. And the only spiritual
teacher I've ever had has been the universe,
out of this kind of profound encounter and
communion, and then surrendering and let it
teach me whatever it wanted me to know. On the
one hand, you're learning from the universe,
and on the other hand, it's being facilitated
by a very particular molecule. Yeah. Isn't that
interesting? Yeah. And of course we have hundreds,
thousands of molecules we find in nature that
facilitate these amplified states
of consciousness. It just happens
that LSD happens to be a synthesized
version that came from Albert Hofmann's
work. But the fundamental dynamic is the same. It
amplifies consciousness for a few hours at a time,
and how you use that amplified state
determines whether you're just having
an enjoyable afternoon with the Grateful Dead,
or whether you're having a spiritually cleansing,
purifying process that then opens you up into some
of the deeper currents of the divine life. Well,
it's very clear from your background which path
you chose. I assume you weren't exactly a party
animal. No. You know, I left the priesthood,
but in some ways the priesthood never left me.
And then as I learned more about the Eastern
traditions and my meditation practice deepened,
and I was teaching courses
on comparative mysticism
and advanced courses on Buddhism, I just I
always considered the spiritual teachers from
multiple religious traditions to be my mentors and
trying to live up to the examples that they gave
us. In your LSD sessions and the layers that you
described, I would imagine that the next obvious
layer after the consciousness of humanity as
a whole, which is huge, would be the ecosystem
of the planet that we share because our species
is not isolated either. Absolutely. But it's
interesting. My work didn't go in that direction.
Many people's do, especially I think when they're
using organic psychedelics like psilocybin or
ayahuasca. Many people have deep experiences of
the deeper web work of life and the fabric of
life. Mine didn't. And over time, the best I've
been able to understand why it went the way it
went and didn't go is because humanity forms
the greatest danger to life on this planet.
We are the problem. And my work seemed to be
really narrowly focused on helping transform,
helping humanity transform its consciousness.
And if humanity can come to a clarity and
resolution of its of its negative karma and
the spiritual awakening, then the planet will
be safe. The planet will can be revived, will be
safe because we will not use our intellect in a
way which is at the expense of other life forms.
So I didn't go laterally. I just I kind of went
deeper. So what happened when I kind of after
spending years working at the
collective level, I went through
a process where I went through another
cycle of birth and death. In the beginning,
I thought, oh, you go through ego death,
and that's the death. And then you enter
into transpersonal reality, spiritual reality.
What I found is that that's not quite so easy,
that there are multiple layers of death that you
go to, go through as you go into deeper and deeper
layers of the universe. So
after I had been working
kind of at the collective layer for some time, I
went through a process where my entire identity
as a human being began to fall away from me.
And I found that we have we have an identity
which is deeper than our personal identity. And
just as ego death, your personal identity falls
away, still you have a human identity which is
underneath. And that began to fall away. And when
that came fall away, all the stories, all the
mythologies, all the theologies, all the religions
of the world fell away. And I entered into states
of consciousness that were radically beyond
human history. It was as if it had the quality
of like being in the space station, international
space station far above the earth. And all the
details of the earth are just fallen away. And
I was in a world of extraordinary quiet,
stillness. And then a new round of teaching began.
And the new round of teaching was taking me into
archetypal reality, the layers of reality that
that are beyond the layers that stand in between
the unit of source for which all life springs,
and yet it unfolds in layers. And some of those
layers we call archetypal, not one layer, but
multiple layers. They structure, they manifest,
they create time and space, they manifest time
and space. They're the fundamental constitutive
processes that lead to time and space as we know
it. And then I spent a couple years working there.
Well, that's very interesting. I had a mentor
years ago, Arthur M. Young, who was a cosmologist
and an inventor. And he would sometimes
poke us with a question. It was, how do you
reconcile being a single unique individual
separate from everything and at the same time
one with everything? Yeah, that is the paradox,
isn't it? And he said the answer is in what
he called the realm of mythos, mythology,
or the archetypal realm is the
realm that connects the two.
Interesting. Yeah, I can understand that.
You know, in some spiritual traditions,
they sacrifice the individual and the vision is
that when you achieve realization of spiritual
awakening, you dissolve as a drop in the ocean,
you return to the ocean, the drop dissolves,
and you are now one with the divine and there is
no more individual separate individual at all.
But that's not been my experience. My experience
has been that the boundaries of the individual
are radically expanded. The commerce with the
surround is radically expanded. There is no
separate individuality, but there is nevertheless
an individuality. I've come to believe that
individuality is one of the great gifts
that the physical universe gives us
and that gift is not simply to be returned
when we make contact with the unity of reality,
but actually there is a there is
a suffusion that union actually
requires a highly developed
individuality to sustain it
and then individuality allows us to
enter to grow and be nourished by this
communion and to become a deeper kind of
individuality than we were at earlier stages.
But always there is this, there are these
two fundamental truths, the truth of oneness
and the truth of individuality which shares
and receives and that interconnected truth that
Buddhism emphasizes so much, the
truth of interdependent co-arising.
Interdependent co-arising. It's as if
this is the self-creation of the universe.
Yes, and we are part of that. We're part of the
manifestation. We're part of its evolutionary
journey and we are its children and
we are an edge as it explores itself.
Here's where I get stuck a little bit and I
think maybe you can help me through this impasse.
If you're dealing in the archetypal realm, as
you've described, to my understanding all of
the archetypes that we know
are expressed in human terms
– the father archetype, the mother archetype,
the hero and so on – but you're also saying that
you move beyond human terms. So how do the
archetypes manifest when you're
beyond the human side of things?
Good question. You know, I experienced archetypes
that affirmed Jung's understanding of the
collective psyche, but I didn't experience
archetypes the way he describes archetypes.
I didn't experience the wise old man or
the wise woman or the trickster. I didn't
experience archetypes in that form. I'm not
saying they don't exist, it's just not how I
experienced it. The other major voice
in archetypes is Plato, who
conceptualized archetypes as
unchanging ideas in the mind of an eternal
being. So they are the blueprints, the unchanging
blueprints which are used in creation, and I
didn't experience archetypes that way either.
I experienced archetypes as vast, massive
beings living on a different order of time,
a different order of reality, so vast that I
literally could not wrap my mind around them.
I could not see them. The closest I could come
to seeing them, my mind imaged them as galaxies,
you know, just vast, completely different order,
and not static, like galaxies moving very slow
relative to a solar system spin, but deliberately
and on a different scale of existence. And that's
how I experienced archetypes,
not human, not in any human form,
profoundly transcended to the human
project, and yet crystallizing the human project
as their own intention. So the basic image that
comes down, it's kind of classic Sri Aurobindo
kind of image, where the one cascades into layers
and layers and layers, and some of those layers
we called archetypal. And I guess if we get down
to the lower layers, we may find wise old man,
wise old woman, those human forms. But at the
deeper levels, we're looking at the cosmic
principles of creation, the living beings that
kind of manifest time and space and orders within
time and space. But I only spent about a year and
a half touching these realities,
which is a pittance, I mean, you
know, in no way an exhaustive
account of them. And then I was moved on into
another layer, even beyond the archetypes, beyond
the archetypes, beyond the
archetypes, because the archetypes
emerge out of a deeper level of reality,
a non-dual, a unitive, a oneness that births
existence, you know, the primal void out of which
the Big Bang emerges. Archetypes come, I won't
want to say they come later, but they come,
there's a distance between the one which is the
origin, and then where we are, where everything,
not the 10,000 pieces, as the Tao Te Ching says,
the 10,000 beings. But
yeah, beyond the archetypes.
And it was after I went through the archetypes
and after I had begun to experience some of the
early stories of the way that humanity functions
as a single organism, I began to have experience
there of reincarnation, not of individual souls.
I had some extraordinarily broad experiences of
experiencing the entire human family pulsing
in reincarnation. Every hundred years or so,
another generation coming in and dying, living
their lives, and I began to experience that there
is a genuine sense in which it's not only
individuals who reincarnate, but individuals or
cells within the body of humanity which is
incarnating and growing and becoming more
collectively, but as a body, as a single
being, and we are all parts of that being,
and there is no private karma within this being,
there is only the pulsing and nourishing of
collective karma as we grow individually, as
it grows unitively as a species on this little
piece of the corner of the galaxy. And then after
spending time in that territory, I went into a
year of experiences in the book I call the
Benediction of Blessings. It was just a cascade
of extraordinarily deep experiences that we
recognize from the mystical traditions. One of
them, for example, was a deep experience of
Śūnyatā, emptiness of self, and where there is
no self inside of you, you're experiencing the
world and its diversity, but there's no self here,
there's no self there, there's no self anywhere.
The whole system is living and breathing as one,
just it's a living experience of oneness,
and that's why I began to understand that
no self and oneness were two different sides of
the same coin, because if you have the experience
of no self, then you naturally open up into
the oneness of life, and if you open into the
oneness of life, then you experience
the transparency of all supposedly
separate selves, there are no
separate selves, everything is
living and breathing together. And
I had an experience of the cosmic
void of going beyond all time and space into
something which I think might it be some
approximation of the field of reality out of which
existence sprang, out of which the big bang came,
formless and yet the source of all eventual
forms, well-known themes in mystical traditions.
And I had an experience, one of divine love, just
an overwhelming assault of touching just briefly
the love that lies at the fount of creation,
which is jarring for me because I was prepared
to understand that there was great genius
and intelligence and power behind creation,
but that there was love, that creation was an
act of love in service of some much larger cosmic
process. I had not anticipated that before,
but this love was so overwhelming, it just
took me, broke me down into absolute core,
warmed places in me that had been cold for
so many lifetimes. And then one of the last
experiences there, I had the experience that
I came to call the birth of the diamond soul.
Reincarnation had been part of my
thinking for a long time by this point.
But in the context of a long teaching session,
I began to experience all my lives coming back
into me one by one. And I had done past life
therapy for three years and I was familiar
with about a dozen or so of my lives and healed
and had been healed by them, all that kind of
stuff. But these were coming back in very fast,
just coming back into me. And we reached a point
where they fused, they became one. And when
they fused, there was an extraordinary explosion
in my heart. And that was an explosion
of diamond light. And I was catapulted
into a state beyond anything I had been in before.
And I was an individual. So the individual was
there, but it was a soul individuality, not an
egoic individuality. And it was an individuality
that was functioning on a different order, a
different scale than anything I had known before.
And I think what I was being shown was part of
the story of where reincarnation is taking us.
Because it wasn't anything that happens to me
is happening to other people. So it's nothing
private about it. And I was being shown that
reincarnation is not simply about achieving
some spiritual breakthrough or some condition
of enlightenment, and then you get to leave.
But reincarnation is taking humanity, building a
fundamental structure, which becomes a new form
structure, which becomes a new form for
evolution to continue. And that new form
is what we can think of as the soul, which for
me is the intelligence, the consciousness that
holds all of our former lives, all of our lives
between lives, everything which we've ever
experienced is held in that intelligence. And
I think what's happening is that the soul,
which most people experience only when they
die, and they return to their natural spiritual
condition, that if we expand into the soul and
we contract into ego and expand in the soul,
sooner or later, that soul is waking up inside
humanity, and the soul becomes our true identity,
our living identity. And I think we're seeing
this in our great spiritual teachers, that they're
speaking out of a different sense of reality, a
different identity. And I think we're all going
there. Well, that's beautifully put. You're very
eloquent and you're taking very, very subtle,
delicate ideas and putting them into English.
Trying to. You're doing a magnificent job. Very
few people, I think, could communicate as much as
you just did. Well, you know, I waited 20 years
after I stopped my sessions in 1999. I waited
20 years before I tried to tell the story
of the trajectory of those sessions in LSD and
the Mind of the Universe that was published in
2019. When I finished my sessions in
my meditation, a voice said to me,
20 years in, 20 years out. And I thought, oh,
okay, that means it'll take me maybe 20 years
to internalize everything that I'd
experienced in the 20 years of the journey.
Now I'm coming to understand that
that was probably an optimistic read,
that it really will take many lifetimes to
integrate these experiences. But I do think
that's the significance that there was 20 years
on the journey and then 20 years after the journey
before writing the book. So I really have had
a lot of time to think about these things and,
of course, to teach about them with my students.
How many total LSD trips were included in this
journey? 73. 73. Couldn't we get it rounded up to
75? We got to 73 and the universe kicked me out.
It basically said, you're
done. That's it. I didn't
know I was done. But the last two sessions are
what I call the goodbye sessions. It just really,
they wrapped it up. They gave me an overview. They
showed me how everything fit together, what I was
doing at different stages. And then it gave me
one last set of teachings, personal teachings,
as it let me go. So you
haven't had any LSD since then?
I haven't done any serious high-dose LSD work
since then. I've done some work with psychedelics,
with psilocybin, with some ayahuasca, a little
bit with 5-MeO DMT and San Pedro, but low dose,
nothing pushing the boundaries that I had
been pushing before. In fact, after I stopped,
and I really haven't done much psychedelics at
all, but what little I have done has been focused
on integrating what I had experienced in those
deep sessions, not trying to push the boundaries,
any further boundaries. And we should mention,
you are not recommending or encouraging other
people to do what you did. Absolutely. In fact,
I discourage every time I'm giving talks, I
discourage from people from doing what I did.
In the sense that I'm not discouraging them from
using psychedelics, but discouraging them from
using the protocol that I did, which was a
systematic, constant working with
high doses on about five times a year,
blowing your mind apart, entering into some
communion, congealing again. It's just that
when you do it that aggressively,
it becomes a very demanding
lifestyle. You spend so much of your
energy having to navigate the ramifications
of your experiences, of having to manage the
implications of it, the physical, subtle energy
ramifications. And I also had a sense in the
beginning, I thought there was an end point
to the journey. I thought the goal was to get
to some definite end point. Like the diamond mind
luminosity. Diamond mind, or oneness with God,
or the metacosmic void. But what I found is
that there oneness with God, there are many
permutations of oneness with God, there are many
variations, and there are even variations of
formlessness. There are permutations of that. And
then I had this one experience in the middle of
the diamond luminosity years, where I was cooking
in diamond luminosity. I was totally absorbed,
totally happy, ecstatically, in this
hyper-hyper-clarity. And then my visual
field opened, 90 degrees it turned, and I saw a
reality far in the distance. And I saw a reality
there, and a light hit me from that reality. And
it hit me, and it just instantly transported me
into a reality even beyond diamond luminosity.
And it lasted only a second or two. But then I,
it totally changed my understanding, my
cosmology, because that's when I understood
that it's truly an infinite universe that we are
in. We'll never get to the end of it. No matter
how long we work, we just get to some deeper
balancing point between the infinite and our
individuality. Now that I know that, if I were
doing it over again, I would be much gentler on
myself. I would work with lower doses. I would
be more patient for the longer-term journey,
because it isn't about getting to some endpoint.
It's about your living relationship with the
infinity that we are all part of. And you can,
to go deeper is not necessarily to get more.
It's a balance. It's a balancing act.
Well, that's a lot to digest. Many, many different
visions and obviously incorporating those visions
into your life. Has it changed you in terms of
your mission in life or your purpose?
It has changed me deeply.
And I wish it had resulted in a
permanent abiding state of enlightenment,
as one classically would
love to enjoy. And it hasn't
produced that, but it has changed me deeply.
It's changed my understanding of life. It's given
me a felt sense of relaxation and enjoyment.
The religious traditions that I had studied
professionally, essentially
they're all essentially
with variations up and out cosmologies. You
achieve salvation, grace, or enlightenment,
and you come to some understanding, and then
you're released from the wheel of Saṃsāra.
You're released into some trans-samsaric
reality, extra-samsaric reality, to enjoy
bliss and some off-planet paradise.
Over time, I came to understand that
transcendence is only the midpoint of the
journey. To discover the truth of existence
is a wonderful thing. To touch God, to understand
that your nature and the divine nature are the
same reality, that's a wonderful thing. But
that's only the midpoint of the journey.
The other point, the other half, is bringing
it in here, living it inside time and space.
And that's a long, long process. My sessions
told me toward the end, there's the dying of
seeing and the dying of holding. The dying of
seeing I had done, the dying you have to go
through to see and experience the communion. But
the dying of holding begins after the sessions,
or after your journey, and that's been
occupying me for all the years since 1999.
And that's a long process. But along the way,
there's a peace that comes, a relaxation,
and an appreciation of the beauty and
the genius that we are surrounded by,
continuously. And when you work at a university,
you know, the primary religion of the university
is science. And science is magnificent, you know,
I love science. But it's been mixed with this
reductive materialism, this carryover from
19th century thought, which is so debilitating,
and this vision that it's all chance, it's all
screened by necessity, and there's no intrinsic
meaning to our existence, and there's certainly
no guidance. And that's a very debilitating
philosophy for undergraduates to absorb in their
life. That philosophy would suggest that all of
these profound experiences you've just described
were drug-induced hallucinations. Absolutely.
They have no existential value, no philosophical
value. You know, they're meaningless. But those
ideas are usually held by people who have never
had any of these experiences. People who have
those experiences quickly change their mind,
and they realize the truth of the experiences.
Even though, you know, it's not like no
experience is absolute, you know, it's not
to privilege, overprivilege anyone's experience.
What's important, I think, is not what any one
person experiences, but what all of us experience
together, and it's putting all of our experiences
on the table together, where we
can sift out what's ephemeral,
what's transitory, what's idiosyncratic
from what is really common ground. And that,
I think, we're going to be moving more and more
into in the years ahead, what's common ground.
Your book, The Living Classroom, is coming out,
or has just come out recently in a new edition.
And in that edition, you go back and observe
how your psychedelic work of many decades ago,
which was profound and which you kept hidden
from your students and your colleagues,
actually was influencing them nonetheless.
Yeah, it was kind of, the classroom was kind of
like a test case for actually testing some of the
metaphysical implications of these visionary
experiences, where you learn the essence of
oneness, that there is a fundamental oneness
within which we all exist,
like we're all in a pool,
and anything, any ripples we make or touches
everybody in the pool. My students didn't know
anything about my psychedelic work. Even when
I taught psychedelics, I was teaching Stan Grof
work. I never let them know that I was
doing this work myself. It was illegal,
and I couldn't let them
know. And yet,
I found that they were being touched by
my experiences. When I would be going into
deeper breakthrough levels, I found that they
were beginning to be activated in their own lives,
just by being around me, just by encountering
some of the ideas. And I found that there was a
certain transparency developing in my mind, which
I was not aware of in the beginning, and I was
powerless to control. But I would
just be lecturing on an ordinary day,
and I would be reaching for an
example to crystallize some point,
to make it real. And I began to
have students come up to me after
class and say things like, it's funny you use that
example that you use today, because that's exactly
what happened to me this week.
And I was not aware of making any
paranormal contact with them.
And at first, I thought,
okay, that's happenstance. I was
taught to treat that as trivial.
But it kept happening, and it kept happening
over and over, and I began to realize something
deeper was happening, and I had to understand
it. And it took me a long time to really begin to
understand the fundamental ways in which fields
of consciousness work, and energetic resonance
works. So I found that my sessions and my
immersion into these deep transcendent states
had changed my psychic makeup in some way,
that made me kind of as a lightning rod,
sparking transformation in those of my students
who were receptive to this type of influence.
And it wasn't by conscious intention on my
part or design. In fact, I had to learn how to
manage and control these forces. How do
you ensure freedom of consent and free will
when this is operating so unconsciously in the
room? And I developed a different way of teaching
what you might call a quantum pedagogy in
contrast to a Newtonian pedagogy. And it's not to
pretend that individual minds don't exist,
but there is that second part, the quantum
fields in which all of our minds are within
a field of mind. And that's why I developed
strategies to begin to take advantage of this, to
empower their learning by using exercises in the
classroom that drew upon the strength and power
of these collective fields. And when I first wrote
The Living Classroom, I didn't mention
psychedelics at all because it was 2008.
I didn't want psychedelics to be a red herring
that would prevent these ideas from being used
by teachers up and down, you know, from K to
graduate schools. But then later, after I had
written LSD in the Mind of the Universe, and I
was out of the psychedelic closet and I was no
longer working at the university, SUNY invited me
to tell the truth in the second edition. And so
there I tell the truth that what I referred to
in the first edition as spiritual practices that
were taking me deeper into that ground, those
spiritual practices was my psychedelic practice.
And so I'm owning the fact that it really is the
LSD in the Mind of the Universe is the backstory
to The Living Classroom. And I might mention
that I had been wrestling with the ideas from
The Living Classroom, but the entire book
was downloaded in 10 minutes in one session.
It just dropped in clear. It took me years to
work out all the details, but the fundamental
solution, why my students were being activated,
dropped in in 10 minutes. And it was so clear
when I got to my notes and I looked at them all
again, I didn't even write down the details.
I knew I had it. Would you say that your
psychedelic experiences affected your aura?
One could, even deeper. I mean, I kind of, you
know, Alex Grey's paintings are magnificent,
and he's very good at depicting the enormous
energy that psychedelics can activate. And so
his figures are figures on fire. And that's
very true. Even after the session is over,
your subtle energy system is running more
powerfully than it had run previously.
And this energy is contagious. States of
consciousness are contagious. Negative states
are contagious. Positive states are contagious.
And it's just a natural fact of nature. So my
energy was triggering their energy. Now,
most people were not activated in this way,
but those who were receptive were activated.
And then I imagine it fed back to you and
influenced you yet again. Yeah. And so there
was often a feedback loop that would happen.
I would say something, it would open up them.
They would more energy come into the room. I
would receive it. It would affect me. Sometimes
there was so much creativity in the room that
after the class was over, I would copy down
the blackboard because I had gotten insights
and seen things that I had not seen as
clearly, quite as clearly, before that time.
Now, I've used LSD a lot myself, and probably
over a hundred times. Not as methodically as
you have done, but still with the intent of doing
it for self-awareness and spiritual purposes.
And it's led me to be where I am today, I
suppose. I have no regrets whatsoever. But
it can be a little bit debilitating. A heavy
dose of LSD leaves one, like the next day,
kind of exhausted. Exhausted, yeah. When
you open in those deep states, you open
into very high energy levels of awareness.
And I learned that every deeper level of
consciousness functions at a higher level of
energy. So when you go into those deep levels,
you're opening into high energy. And after it's
all over, you can feel tired. Your subtle energy
system can feel achy. And the more I began to
appreciate the cost of each session to your body,
the more I began to prepare more conscientiously
for each session. So I would do certain spiritual
practices before session, and then deeper,
different practices, soul integration practices
after a session. I would make sure I would have
a chiropractic adjustment and a massage before
session, because I wanted my system to be
as balanced and open as possible to handle
what was about to happen. But it does. It takes
days. I find that there's a 24-hour window,
then there's kind of a three-day window, about
a 10-day window, and a one-month window. And it
closes gradually. And that's one of the things I
emphasize if you're working systematically with
psychedelics, to have a daily spiritual practice.
And the deeper you're working with psychedelics,
the more important it is to have a daily
spiritual practice, because it helps you stabilize
what opens you in those experiences, stabilize
it, and also helps you process the enormous energy
that otherwise would build up in my body. And
by doing spiritual practice and meditation,
it gave that energy a place to run in between
sessions. So it is challenging. It takes time.
It's not to be taken lightly. Have you looked into
the physiological aspects of LSD, how it might
work? I know there are different
theories. Does it activate the
brain to push you into a higher level,
or is it the opposite? Does it deactivate or
activate some parts and deactivate other parts?
Yeah, the default turning off the default mode
network and opening up. You know, I pay attention
to that. And I try to follow it. I'm not a
scientist, so I don't pretend to be a scientist.
But for the most part, I let the science guys
work out, hold on to those
details. And I find that when
they are interpreting the physiological data that
they get, they usually are working it within some
set of metaphysical assumptions. And some of those
metaphysical assumptions are more adequate than
others. And my metaphysical experience is
rather extreme. And so some of that stuff
doesn't seem to me to be getting at the core.
Some of it does. Shutting down the default mode
network opens us up to greater creativity and
whatnot. But I think that much of that discussion
still doesn't appreciate the depth of cosmological
access that opens in deep psychedelic experience.
One of the problems I think in our history,
our intellectual history around psychedelics,
is that many fundamental or influential accounts
were written after only a handful of experiences.
So The Doors of Perception, Aldous Huxley, a
wonderful book after one experience. He was a
great writer. He was a great writer and a great
thinker. When Houston Smith wrote Cleansing the
Doors of Perception, which is his collection of
his writings on psychedelics, he had only taken
LSD six times. And after that, he said the bummers
increased and he decided to hang up the phone,
take out lots of experience. But that sort of
underestimates what can happen if you don't hang
up the phone, if you keep going back to the well.
And when Michael Pollan wrote his book, a very
important, helpful book, How to Change Your Mind,
he had only taken psychedelics a handful of times,
which I think helps explain
some of the limitations of his
interpretation of how psychedelics work that
come in the end of the book. I think it's
important for us to not just look at the first
few experiences that open, but what opens in a
long lineage of experiences. And here we have
a lot to learn from the indigenous cultures
who have been working with psychedelics for
thousands of years, and they have a long lifetime
of working with these states. And there are
advanced chapters that open in the book only
after the preliminary chapters have been digested.
Well, I was about to say that I thought you
probably identified yourself as a philosophical
idealist. Now I'm not so sure, because I don't
think that indigenous cultures would necessarily
go along with that. Yeah, and you know, every
psychedelic has a certain spectrum. It operates
on a certain spectrum of consciousness, from even
low dose to high dose, but generally there's a
certain range that it activates. And I think LSD
tends to, what I think of as kind of a high
altitude psychedelic, it tends to operate,
activate at higher levels,
very high cosmological levels.
Something like psilocybin, which is such a
wonderful psychedelic, which is so body-oriented
and heart-oriented and emotionally oriented, it
tends to operate at a different level, a lower
level in some ways, but a rich level. And so
we have to look at each particular psychedelic,
the spectrum of consciousness that it activates,
how we can work with each one, and then we start
to put the puzzle together. Does what we learn
from psilocybin, how does that mesh with what
we learn from ayahuasca and LSD? Pretty soon we
start to have a larger landscape that's waiting
for us in these states. Now I know you are on
the board of directors of the Grof Institute,
isn't that correct? Yeah, I'm on
the advisory board of Grof Legacy
Training. Yeah, I see myself very
much in Stan's lineage. I mean,
he was the one whose books
gave me the confidence to go
where I eventually went. And if I push the
boundaries of his paradigm a little bit here
and there, I still feel myself very strongly
within his lineage. Well, if I understand it
correctly, and I did know Stan quite well in
the days when I lived in California, did many
interviews with him, I am under the impression
that his thrust was that there are ways to achieve
psychedelic states through breathing exercises
and through other methods that don't involve
molecules. Yeah, yeah, and he's done that and
demonstrated that in worldwide workshops and
teachings. And you can't make breathing illegal.
And all you have to do is breathe deeply in a
precise kind of way, and carefully control
circumstances, and you amplify consciousness,
and the same mechanisms begin to be activated that
can be activated with a psychedelic substance.
So to me, psychedelics are not to the point. It's
the nature of consciousness that is to the point.
Psychedelics amplify consciousness, but it's
consciousness that does the work. And that's why
there's a fundamental convergence of the vision of
reality that emerges in the great non-psychedelic
spiritual contemplative traditions and the
psychedelic traditions. We're not discovering
a new universe. We're discovering the same
universe using a different set of techniques
to explore that universe. So, but I presume
you're not actively engaged in training holotropic
therapy? No, I made a choice long ago not to
function clinically. I think that's a different
set of skills. You require a different set of
training to when you work with other people,
taking other people into these states. You have to
not only know what you're doing from having your
own experiences in these states, but you should
have a good strong clinical grounding so you can
recognize when things are not going well and how
to work with other people. I decided to function
as an explorer, as a solitary explorer,
to push the boundaries as far
as I could, and then to bring
back and share what I had learned with other
people. And I find that people who respond to
LSD in the Mind of the Universe, many of
them are psychedelic people themselves,
but many of them are not. Many of them just have
a long lifelong practice in meditation or yoga
and they recognize a parallel between what
they've experienced and what I'm describing.
I think that's really important. It's
consciousness that does the work.
Well, I totally agree with you about that.
I guess that's the main thrust of our
YouTube channel as well. But I
wonder, now that you're retired,
would you say that your emphasis is to share with
people what you learned long ago taking LSD? Or
is it more that your emphasis is
to help save humanity from itself?
Well, we haven't touched yet on what's
happening to humanity as a whole, but
yeah, I guess first it took me a long time. I
really try to be candid in the book. The last
chapter of the book is called Coming Off the
Mountain, and that was the longest chapter to
write. It took me a year to write that chapter
because I had to really come to terms with
what happened when I stopped my sessions. I
thought I was carefully attending to integration
all the way up the mountain, really trying
to live the values that I had been shown,
trying to maintain other forms of spiritual
practice. And I thought that when it was time
to stop, that I would simply be able to withdraw
and hold on to those gems and let them nourish me.
But what I found was that I had
entered so deeply so many times
into the crystalline body of divinity
that I began to experience an existential
kind of sadness. I knew I had to stop. My body was
telling me, my mind was telling me I had to stop.
And I knew I would never enter into these states
again as deeply until I died.
You can't enter these states simply by meditating
very firmly, not these radical states. And the
sadness of not being able to enter into communion
with my beloved for years was very hard at first.
It took me a long time. It took me about 10 years
to really become committed to living on this
planet again with feet solidly grounded,
which is another reason why I wouldn't
encourage people to do what I did,
because I knew that somewhere along the line
I had made a mistake, and I didn't know where
that mistake was. And I turned to examine my
history to find out where the mistake was.
And I began to realize that I had lost
the balance, the critical
balance between transcendence
and eminence, between leaving time space and
going into the infinite and then being grounded
in time space, which is the other important
truth. And I was basically overextended,
I was spiritually overextended, and I made
a conscious decision to ground myself inside
the planet in my life. But the second reason that
it was hard is because I wasn't allowed to talk
about my experiences. I'm a teacher. I love to
share information. I wasn't allowed to share
that information. So writing LSD in the Mind
of the Universe was the beginning of healing
that wound of silence so that I could take the
two, I'd split my life in two hearts. I was a
professor and I was a psychonaut, but finally
being honest about my experiences allowed those
to come back together, and I began to be whole
within myself. And that process continues.
So what I've been asking myself and see the years
since LSD in the Mind of the Universe has been
published is, how can I be useful? How can I make
this unusual journey which I've taken useful to
other people without, I'm
not teaching them to go into
these states, I'm not holding their hand while
they go into these states. That's other people's
work, the holotropic breathwork people, the other
psychedelic therapists, that's what they're doing.
I'm basically, first I don't really have an
agenda. I'm comfortable just being writing my
life out as it is. I don't have any felt need to
accomplish anything or to do anything, but I'd
like to be helpful. I'd like to be useful. And I
think that means convening circles of conversation
around the themes of the book, drawing people in
inviting people in who have psychedelic
experiences, drawing people in who have spiritual
experiences without any psychedelics involved, so
that we can together process the deeper mysteries
of life that psychedelics can reveal. And slowly
that seems to be taking shape. I basically go
where I'm invited. I don't really seek
invitations, but if people want
to have conversations about
these things, I'm happy to go there. Well,
you're certainly invited to come back here.
Yeah, now we go to actually one of the most
surprising aspects of the journey was insights
into where humanity is and its spiritual evolution
and where it's going, which I didn't even, I had
no idea that this was possible when I went into
this work, but it actually became one of the
dominant motifs of the work. And I kept on having
visions over a six-year period of humanity coming
to a turning point, coming to a before and after,
history, epic-making turning point, that we were
going into a time of profound spiritual awakening,
profound spiritual breakthrough. And this went on
for years, but it never showed me how we were
going to get there. I looked around and I didn't
see us, I saw us heading to the mall and to
the football stadium as much as to a spiritual
breakthrough. And then I had that experience in
one session, which took me deeply into the future,
not as Chris Bache, but again dissolved into the
collective psyche and gave me the experience of
the death and rebirth that humanity is coming
into, a time of profound deconstruction, a time
of loss of control, a time of great existential
suffering, which is global, not national or
individual, it's just global, a time which the
suffering will be so severe, at least in my
experience, that we might think it will be an
extinction event, that we are coming to the end
of the line for humanity on this planet. We've so
overdrawn and overtaxed our systems, but at least
in my experiences, I was shown that we come
through this experience. We're reduced in number,
but we come through this experience and something
about the depth of suffering that we encounter
opens us up at the deepest level of our being.
It opens our heart and it opens our mind.
And there were a lot of teachings around
non-linear systems and what
happens when the collective
psyche, the collective unconscious is activated
at such a deep level, but that in this period of
history, we are giving birth to the next iteration
of humanity. And I think it has to do with the
birth of the diamond soul. I think we are coming,
we can no longer afford to live in a planet which
is being run by egos, even well-intentioned
egos. We need to grow up if we're really going to
survive as a species. And I think growing up
means growing into the great age which has been
gestating within us for thousands and thousands
of years, letting that age express itself and
taking us forward. So I think that we are coming
into a time of intense suffering, intense labor,
but magnificent outcome. The birth of the future
human is the birth of a... And many, many people
have this insight. They have these insights.
The indigenous people have these insights.
I'm aware of that. We've done other interviews
with visionary thinkers who see this and I always
wonder though, can we be sure we're going to come
out of the crisis? It seems to me we're very close
to extinction. As far as I know, the future
isn't fixed. There's no guarantee that we're
going to pull through. No probabilities,
extrapolating probabilities. And it does look
very dire and some very wise and well-informed
individuals think that we're already extinct,
we just don't know it, we're living out the last
years of an exhausted planet. And I understand
that and I don't have an empirical evidence
that would argue against that. All I have is my
visionary experience and I've had experiences
of the future human and in the last great vision
of my journey, it was in the 70th session, the
last vision, it took me, it stripped me down
mercilessly. It was the largest
strip down, deepest strip down
I went through in any of my journeys
and it took me eventually deep into the future
and it gave me a series of teachings but the
core of it was and it gave me an experience of
the future human. So that for me and the future
human that I experienced is just
just magnificent. It's not an improved humanity,
it's a radical shift in the fundamental baseline
of humanity. So for me, I cannot doubt that we
will make it through it because I've been given
the experience that we do make it through it.
But I understand it is everything we have to
reach deep because there are no guarantees in
nature. We have to reach deep and work very hard
to realize the opportunity that's coming our way.
Well, Chris Bache, what a magnificent time
to share with you the ups and downs of this
glorious vision. I'm so glad that you've come
to Albuquerque to be with me and to open up your
heart and your soul to me and to the New Thinking
Allowed audience. Chris, thank you so much.
Thank you, Jeff. It's been
a wonderful conversation and
I'm honored deeply. You who have been in this
field for so long and touched so many people's
lives, it's true privilege to sit with you.
Well, I am honored to sit with you,
I can tell you that.
Someone who has explored
psychedelics just about as far as possible.
And for those of you watching or listening,
thank you for being with us because
you are the reason that we are here.
For early access to our videos and live stream
events, sign up for our free weekly newsletter
at newthinkingallowed.org. Book
4 in the New Thinking Allowed
Dialogue Series is Charles T. Tart, 70 Years
of Exploring Consciousness and Parapsychology,
now available on Amazon. New
Thinking Allowed is presented by
the California Institute for Human Science, a
fully accredited university offering distant
learning graduate degrees that focus on mind,
body and spirit. The topics that we cover here,
we are particularly excited to
announce new degrees emphasizing
parapsychology and the paranormal.
Visit their website at cihs.edu. You can
now download all eight copies of the New
Thinking Allowed magazine for free or
order beautiful printed copies.
Go to newthinkingallowed.org.